---
layout: post
title: Is using Arduino a bad thing?
categories: misc
---

People who know me personally in real life also know that I sometimes like to pile on Arduino (usually in a tongue-in-cheek manner) when the topic of it comes up. So I'm writing this post just to clarify why I do that and also just to consolidate my thoughts on Arduino in general. 


# The Good
First things first, I want to clarify that I have nothing against Arduino and people who use it. Heck, I use it myself.

Arduino has done wonders for electronics hobbyists such as myself by massively lowering the barrier of entry to the world of electronics. People can do much cooler stuff nowadays with much less effort compared to with just using discrete electronic components. And this is important, because the ability to make cool stuff helps sustain your interest in the hobby.

It's also great for rapid prototyping. Need a quick proof of concept to show that your idea works? No problem, fire up the Arduino IDE and have it up and running in minutes. No need to waste time configuring your peripherals, choosing your pins, etc. 

And sometimes, using Arduino for a project is just easier and more convenient. Especially when the project isn't super demanding and requires you to optimize for performance, power efficiency, etc. If you need to do a thing, and Arduino can do it, great. (Assuming you're not planning to make a product out of it, but then again there are also products out there with Arduino boards shoved into them).

# The Bad
The ease of use of Arduino is simultaneously its biggest draw and its biggest downfall. This is because in order to make it easy to use, it wastes a lot of resources on the MCU and it also uses a lot of the peripherals inefficiently by default.

