---
layout: post
title: "An introduction to Visible Light Communication (VLC)"
categories: misc
---

Note: This post is meant to a quick introduction and overview of visible light communication. It doesn't even begin to capture the entire field and there are plenty of things you can learn more about through a Google search.

# What is VLC?

Visible Light Communication (VLC) is a subset of Optical Wireless Communications (OWC) where visible light is used as a transmission medium. This is in contrast with conventional wireless communication systems that make use of radio waves. 

# Why VLC? 
One of the main attractions of VLC is its potential to help overcome the '**spectrum crunch**', where the growing demand for RF spectrum for wireless communications outpaces the available spectrum resources allocated for it. 

The rapid increase of wireless devices in recent times such as smartphones, tablets, laptops, IoT devices means that the number of devices competing for available spectrum has significantly increased, leading to a saturation of existing frequency bands. Common wireless communication protocols such as WiFi, Bluetooth, Zigbee, etc all predominantly use the 2.4GHz band, further exacerbating the problem. 

While there are newer frequency bands such as 5GHz and 6GHz being opened for use, this can't keep going on forever as higher frequencies mean shorter wavelengths, reducing their propagation distance and penetration power. This would require more infrastructure to provide better coverage. VLC can help alleviate the spectrum crunch by providing wireless communications operating in the visible spectrum which is largely unoccupied. 

VLC is useful in indoor environments where lighting systems are already in place. By modifying exisiting lighting infrastructure to allow for VLC capability, we can create indoor wireless communication 'hubs', increasing the available communication capacity and offloading some of the data traffic from RF systems to VLC systems. This is especially useful in high-density areas such as offices, transportation hubs, stadiums, etc where the RF spectrum can quickly become congested due to the large number of users. 

While the focus of most VLC research is on indoor systems, VLC can also be used outdoors as well. In fact, there's also a working example in the form of [RONJA (Reasonable Optical Near Joint Access)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RONJA), a VLC system developed in the Czech Republic. 

There are also other benefits to VLC such as: 
- **Higher data rates and bandwidth**: VLC operates at higher frequencies which allows for more data cycles per second. The broader visible spectrum also means that there's more available bandwidth for simultaneous data transmission.
- **Security**: VLC is inherently directional and requires light of sight, and since light can't penetrate walls, you can effectively 'lock' it in a closed space and prevent it from being intercepted. 
- **No RF interference**: VLC can be useful in environments where there are RF-sensitive equipment such as hospitals and aircraft.

# How does VLC work?
VLC works by modulating a light source (usually an LED) to encode digital data. Data is usually encoded on the light source's intensity. On the receiving end, these light signals are detected and then demodulated to obtain the original data. This works pretty similarly to already existing RF systems.  

The most common form of VLC modulation schemes are pulse-based, modulating the digital data on a train of pulses to vary the intensity of the LED. Pulse-based modulation schemes are popular because it simplifies the requirements for the LED driver. The same driver can be used to provide dimming control and data transmission at the same time. Some examples of pulse-based modulation schemes are **On-Off Keying (OOK)**, **Variable Pulse Position Modulation (VPPM)**, and **Color Shift Keying (CSK)**. This is by no means an exhaustive list of the possible modulation schemes out there but these are the most common.

In OOK, the LED is simply switched on and off according to the bits in the stream, where a '1' is represented by the LED being on and a '0' is represented by the LED being off. The LED is not turned off completely but its brightness is greatly reduced. 

VPPM also involves switching the LED on and off, but instead the data is encoded on the position of the pulse within the pulse period. A pulse located at the beginning of the period represents a '0' whereas a pulse located at the end of the period represents a '1'. Dimming is performed by varying the width of the pulse, which is pretty much just the same as changing the brightness of an LED using PWM by varying the duty cycle. 

In CSK, the data is encoded on the color of the light itself. Each color, which is a combination of RGB values, represents a specific symbol or bit of data. The LED will shift between colors to transmit the data. To make the CSK signal imperceptible, it takes advantage of the limited temporal sensitivity of color change in the human eye. By changing the color fast enough and adjusting the signals to a specific time-averaged color over the critical flicker fusion and critical color fusion thresholds, we will only be able to perceive an 'average' color from the lights despite the fact that it is actually changing colors rapidly. 

# What challenges does VLC currently face?
VLC holds great promise but it does have quite a bit of challenges standing in its way before it can realistically be adopted for widespread use. 

One of the most fundamental issues with VLC is integrating it with lighting systems. Integrating VLC into lighting systems presents a challenge because some features of lighting systems actually work against VLC. **Dimming** is one such example. 

Dimming is a staple feature in modern lighting, allowing users to adjust the brightness of their lights according to their preferences. However, dimming can reduce the data rate and decrease the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). This can introduce more errors and reduce the maximum commmunication range. 

One possible way of addressing this is by incorporating an adaptive modulation technique that allows the VLC system to change the modulaton scheme based on the channel conditions. For example, when the lights are dimmed, this might trigger a switch to a modulation scheme with a slower data rate but better error resiliency.

**Flickering** is another problem as it can cause discomfort and other health concerns in humans. Generally, VLC systems try to operate at speeds well above the **flicker fusion threshold**, which represents the frequency at which the human eye can no longer perceive flickering. However, flicker can arise as a result of many factors such as a slow modulation rate, or even the response time of the LED itself. 

Another fundamental problem with integrating VLC into lighting systems is how would the VLC system function if the lights are turned off? After all, we don't have our lights on 24/7 do we? There's actually some research into what's known as VLC-in-the-dark. Essentially, the idea is to use very short light pulses at high frequencies to transmit data. These pulses are not visible to the human eye but can still be picked up by light sensors. This basically allows for an always-on VLC system regardless of the whether the lights are being used for illumination purposes. Of course, this is very an experimental thing and incredibly complex to implement practically but it is a step in the right direction. 
